Shell Family History

The modern shell (the one which was standardised in 1997, haha) is
descended in both spirit (that is, ideas and syntax) and source code
from earlier Unix shells.  There are different shell implementations, some
share the same or a similar syntax, others have a more different syntax
but implement the same or similar functionalities.

A major part of the family, the Bourne Shell-like shells, all share a
core syntax that was first implementated in a shell written by Steven
Bourne---hence, Bourne Shell.  Bourne Shell was shipped with Version 7
Unix, and it was the standard '/bin/sh' for many Unix systems for a long
while.  The other shells in this family are AT&T's Korn Shell ('ksh')
(1983), the GNU project's Bourne Again Shell ('bash') (1989), Kenneth
Almquist's Shell (1989), and pdksh.  Each of these has evolved, giving
each one a unique lineage.  'ksh' was the basis for the POSIX standard
shell; many of the features of 'ksh' were copied by 'bash'.  'pdksh'
is, as its name implies, intended to be directly compatible with 'ksh'.
Almquist's Shell was written to be compatible with the POSIX standard
(which is simpler than Korn Shell), but made available freely, without
requiring a license from AT&T.

The Bourne Shell was written from scratch, but Unix had shells earlier
than that.  The first Unix Shell was Thompson's Shell, which introduced
many ideas that are central to shell today (such as redirection).
Mashey's Shell was a modified version of Thompson's Shell that made it
more suitable for programming (flow control and variables); it was used
with Programmer's Workbench Unix.  Both of these shell's and their authors
will have influenced Bourne in implementing Bourne Shell.

Bill Joy wrote C Shell in XXXX, it shares a niche with other shells but
has a markedly different syntax (being more in the spirit of C than
Algol).  It supported job control and command line editing, both features
which made interactive use more pleasant, and both features were
implemented later in Korn Shell using a different syntax.  C Shell's
history mechanism (using '!') was copied into 'bash'.  C Shell got
extended (and improved?) to become 'tcsh', which is what most C Shell
users use today.

It is notable, in a slightly depressing way, how there are 3 independent
rewrites ('bash', 'ash', 'pdksh') of the shell, motivated by licensing
restrictions.

Many of the fathers of Unix went on to create Plan 9, the standard shell
for which was 'rc'.  In some ways cleaner, simpler, and with a syntax that
is not at all compatible with Bourne Shell-like shells.  It is available
on Unix (via various compatibility packages) but has never been popular.

zsh

